---
title: The Syntax of Static Reflection
author: 
  - Andrew Sutton (<asutton@lock3software.com>)
  - Wyatt Childers (<wchilders@lock3software.com>)
  - Daveed Vandevoorde (<daveed@edg.com>)

geometry:
- left=1in
- right=1in
- top=1in
- bottom=1in

linkcolor: blue

bibliography:
  - p2320.bib
  - ../bib/wg21.bib
---

--------- --------
 Document P2320R0
 Audience SG7
--------- ---------

# Introduction {#intro}

This paper suggests a new syntax for reflection and splicing that differs from
both [@P1240R1] and [@P2237R0]. The syntax in both proposals has various
weaknesses. P1240R1 is largely written using placeholder notation, and while
P2237 offers some concrete improvements, it turns out to have some ambiguity
issues.

We (the authors) considered several notations for the two operations with
respect to several criteria:

- *Expressivity.* The syntax must support a wide array of metaprogramming use
  cases. Broadly, we need syntax to a) inspect the compile-time properties of
  expressions, names, declarations, and entities, b) splice entity references
  and expressions back into source code, and c) expand such splices in contexts
  where pack expansion is allowed.
- *Readability.* Obviously, we'd like our programs to be readable. We want
  syntax that is both visually distinctive yet comprehensible. Because
  metaprogramming (especially splicing) includes several new C++ programming
  concepts, we think the notation should be different than conventional
  notations for e.g., function call and template instantiation.
- *Flexibility.* We shouldn't design notation that prevents future extensions.
  We should also consider future extensions to metaprogramming (like code
  injection) so that we don't end up with wildly different notations for similar
  kinds of functionality.
- *Lack of ambiguity.* The grammar for these terms should be as unambiguous as
  practical, both technically (i.e., not requiring parsing heroics) and visually
  (i.e., not confusing for a normal C++ programmer).
- *Implementability.* Syntax and semantics that cannot be supported by all
  implementations is not viable. The variety of syntactic and semantic analysis
  techniques used by different implementations is known to complicate, if not
  disqualify, seemingly simple or obvious ideas. We can't force implementers
  to standardize on technique.

Section [](#prop) presents the notation we've chosen for reflection and
splicing. Appendix [A](#app) presents other notations and brief analyses.

# Proposal {#prop}

This section describes specific syntax for three features of static reflection:
reflecting names and expressions (Section [](#refl)), splicing (Section
[](#splice.refl)), and pack expansion (Section [](#splice.pack)).  This
corresponds to the scope of [@P1240R1], but does not cover some metaprogramming
mechanisms --- like code injection --- described in [@P2237R0]. However, the
authors have kept those mechanisms in mind while exploring the syntax options
described here and in Appendix [A](#app).

## Reflection {#refl}

We propose to enable reflecting a source construct using `^` as a unary
operator. Because reflection is such a fundamental (and primitive) operation for
metaprogramming, it should have a simple spelling. The `^` is intended to imply
"lifting" or "raising" a term into the metaprogramming environment.

```cpp
meta::info r1 = ^int;  // reflects the type-id int
meta::info r2 = ^x;    // reflects the id-expression x
meta::info r2 = ^f(x); // reflects the call f(x)
```

The suggested grammar for reflection is:

:::{.bnf}
- unary-expression
  - ...
  - reflection-expression
:::

:::{.bnf}
- reflection-expression
  - `^` postfix-expression
  - `^` type-id
  - `^` qualified-namespace-specifier
  - `^` qualified-template-specifier
  - `^` `::`
:::

One of the reasons that we opt for this very terse syntax over the prior
`reflexpr(X)` form, is that we anticipate that it will be desirable to "pass
arguments by reflection" in future proposals. Just as it is convenient to "pass
an argument by address/pointer" using the simple `*` declarator and `&`
operators, having a simple `^` will keep invocation syntax light and readable.

Another (weaker) reason to drop `reflexpr(X)` is that it has proven somewhat
unpopular with the many readers of earlier reflection papers (See [@P2087R0]).

There are two potentially conflicting uses of `^`: Apple's blocks extension
[@blocks] and C++/CLI/CX's managed pointers.

With respect to blocks, `^` is used two ways: as a [unary-expression]{.bnf} and
as part of a [declarator]{.bnf}. A "block literal expression" uses `^` as a
unary operator with approximately this grammar in C++:

:::{.bnf}
- unary-expression:
  - ...
  - `^` type-specifier-seq~opt~ `(` parameter-declaration-clause `)` compound-statement
:::

There is an overlap between this production rule and the [type-id]{.bnf} form of
the [reflection-expression]{.bnf}. Because a block literal always has a
[compound-statement]{.bnf}, there is no ambiguity. In the case where the
[type-specifier-seq]{.bnf} is omitted, we would have to distinguish the
paren-enclosed parameter list from a [primary-expression]{.bnf}. However, this
is the same technique used to differentiate an [expression]{.bnf} from a
[declaration]{.bnf} inside a [condition]{.bnf}. 

The other potential conflict occurs in a declarative context. A block variable
is declared like a function pointer (e.g., `int (^b)(int)`). We don't expect
that "reflection parameters" would ever be declared in this way: a reflection is
always a value, never a function.

C++/CLI/CX also has a potential conflict in the declarative context. A managed
pointer is declared with the `^` operator:

```cpp
MyClass ^h_MyClass = gcnew MyClass;
```

We aren't currently proposing using `^` as part of a declarator or parameter
declaration, but we are concerned about potential conflicts for future
proposals. Reflection variables and parameters will need to be constant
expressions, so there's some wiggle room for using `^` as part of a specialized
style of reflection declaration. Exactly, what such a declaration should look
like is well beyond the scope of this paper, but we are thinking about it.

## Splicing reflections {#splice.refl}

We propose the notation `[: R :]` to denote the splice of a reflection `R`.
Here, the use of bracket notation is explicitly chosen to denote a "gap" in the
source code, filled in by the "reflected value" of `R`. The notation is
intentionally designed to be visually distinctive because it represents a new
programming concept for C++. We prefer to encourage a degree of unfamiliarity.

In general, and without qualification, `[: R :]` splices an [expression]{.bnf}
into the program (assuming `R` reflects a variable, function, or some other
expression). If `R` reflects a type, template, or namespace, the splice operator
must be qualified with an appropriate keyword, except in some contexts where the
meaning is obvious. For example:

```cpp
struct S { struct Inner { }; };
template<int N> struct X;

auto refl = ^S;
auto tmpl = ^X;

void f() {
  typename [:refl:] * x;  // OK: declares x to be a pointer-to-S
  [:refl:] * x;           // error: attempt to multiply int by x
  [:refl:]::Inner i;      // OK: splice as part of a nested-name-specifier
  typename [:refl:]{};    // OK: default-constructs an S temporary
  using T = [:refl:];     // OK: operand must be a type
  struct C : [:refl:] {}; // OK: base classes are types
  template [:tmpl:]<0>;   // OK: names the specialization
  [:tmpl:] < 0 > x;       // error: attempt to compare X with 0
}
```

Note that the extra annotations are necessary even in non-dependent contexts.

That said, we expect SG7 will entertain future proposals that relax the
requirement for qualifying syntax when the splice operand is not value-dependent
(as is done in P2237R0 [@P2237R0]). However, there are two main obstacles to
adopting such proposals. Is readability hurt by the omission of keywords? Does
the implementation require parsing heroics? (There is no implementation
experience for this abbreviated notation in P2237R0.) Note that requiring
keywords now does not limit our ability to make them optional later.

There is one exception to this rule. Annotations differentiating type and
non-type [template-argument]{.bnf}s in a [template-argument-list]{.bnf} can be
omitted. This is a special case that allows reflections (and packs thereof) to
be forwarded to a template taking mixed type/value template arguments or to an
overload set where the kind and type of arguments may vary. For example:

```cpp
template<typename T> void f();
template<int N> void f();

template<meta::info Refl>
void g() {
  f<[:Refl:]>();
}
```

Here, `Refl` can reflect either a type or integer constant expression. We
don't require the program to explicitly state whether `Refl` reflects types
or expressions, as it could reasonably reflect either. 

To "force" `Refl` to be spliced as a type or an expression by adding `typename`
or enclosing the splice in parentheses.

```cpp
template<meta::info Refl>
void g() {
  f<typename [:Refl:]>(); // splices a type
  f<([:Refl:])>();        // splices an expression
}
```

We anticipate the later addition of an [identifier-splice]{.bnf} construct
(currently we use the `[# str #]` syntax in discussions among authors).
However, that construct operates, in part, at the lexical level and has
considerably more subtleties that the authors are exploring (in part through
prototype implementations).  We therefore do not propose syntax for it here, and we
expect that the corresponding functionality will be separated out in revisions
of P1240 or other proposals.

The addition of splicing requires updating the grammar as follows.

:::{.bnf}
- splice
  - `[:` constant-expression `:]`
:::

:::{.bnf}
- primary-expression
  - ...
  - splice
:::

:::{.bnf}
- postfix-expression
  - ...
  - postfix-expression `.` `template`~opt~ splice
  - postfix-expression `->` `template`~opt~ splice

:::

:::{.bnf}
- nested-name-specifier:
  - ...
  - splice `::`
:::

:::{.bnf}
- qualified-namespace-specifier:
  - ...
  - `namespace` splice
:::

(The `namespace` keyword in a [qualified-namespace-specifier]{.bnf} will be
optional in contexts where no other terms could be spliced, such as in a
[namespace-alias-definition]{.bnf}. Note that there are only a few contexts
where a namespace might be spliced into a program, and the `namespace` keyword
is effectively optional in all of them. We could therefore eliminate this
addition to the grammar. However, we include it here for completeness and
consideration.)

:::{.bnf}
- simple-type-specifier:
  - ...
  - `typename`~opt~  splice
  - `template` splice
:::

(The `typename` keyword in a [simple-type-specifier]{.bnf} will be optional in
very specific grammatical contexts, such as in a [base-specifier]{.bnf}.)

:::{.bnf}
- simple-template-id:
  - ...
  - `template` splice `<` template-argument-list `>`
:::

:::{.bnf}
- template-argument:
  - ...
  - `template` splice
:::

(The grammar change for [simple-template-id]{.bnf} will unfortunately require
quite a few wording adjustments.  Ideally, the way templates are "named" should
be reworked in the grammar, because it is currently rather unintuitive.)

## Splicing packs {#splice.pack}

The ability to expand a range of reflections into a list of function arguments,
template arguments, base classes, etc. is an important use case for
metaprogramming. However, the expansion of non-packs is a novel feature and
requires new syntax to nominate a term as being expandable. Our preferred
approach is to require an ellipsis *before* the term being expanded. For
example:

```cpp
using T = std::tuple<int, ...[:range_of_types:]..., bool>;
```

Here, `range_of_types` is a sequence (in the range-based-for-loop sense)
of type reflections. The leading `...`
nominates the splice as expandable, and the trailing `...` explicitly indicates
its expansion.  

We propose to allow such nominations in almost every context where expansion is
allowed (and no others). There are a number of reasons for choosing this syntax.
First, a prefix annotation is necessary to be implementable by all
vendors.[^impl] Second, the choice of `...` is chosen specifically because of
the symmetry with expansion "operator" and the way in which packs are declared,
where the `...` precedes the identifier.

[^impl]: Not all implementations preserve tokens or construct syntax trees
during parsing. The prefix ellipsis in these contexts would alert the compiler
that it needs to preserve those tokens for subsequent expansion.

For fold expressions, at most one cast-expression can be nominated as expandable.

```cpp
(...[:range:] && ...)      // Right fold over a splice
(... && ...[:range:])      // Left fold over a splice
(0.0 + ... + ...[:range:]) // Left binary fold over a splice
```

Semantically, the expansion of such expressions is (more or less) just like the
expansion of normal template and function parameter packs. Here are some
examples:

```cpp
fn(0, 1, ...[:range:]...); // OK: expansion after normal arguments
fn(...[:range:]..., 0, 1); // OK: expansion before normal arguments
fn(...[:range:] * 2...);   // OK: [:range:] * 2 is the pattern
fn(...[:r1:] * [:r2:]...); // OK: iff r1 and r2 have equal size
```

We currently suggest two contexts where nomination is not allowed.

Nominating expressions for use with the `sizeof...` operator seems unnecessary.
The size of a range can be queried using `r.size()` or
`std::ranges::distance(r)`. We don't need a language-based alternative to these
operations.

The second context is in function and template parameter lists:

```cpp
void f(... [:range_of_types:] ...args)
```

This seems like a plausible use of splicing, but there are some deep technical
questions we have yet to address. In particular, `args` is kind of like a
conventional pack, but not really because it's not dependent. We'll need to
introduce new core language machinery to support the declaration of these new
kinds of packs. Note that this seems closely related to the declaration of packs
in discussed P1061R1 [@P1061R1], P1858R2 [@P1858R2], and P2277R0 [@P2277R0].

There is a potential redundancy in the notation. It can be argued that a term
nominated for expansion must always be expanded, so we could omit the trailing
ellipsis, and this would be true today. However, this "optimization" is not
applicable in fold expressions and may not be future-proof. In the future, we
might introduce a "pass-by-reflection" convention that accepts unexpanded
(non-splice) parameter packs. So for now, we choose to require ellipses for
nomination and expansion.

To support this feature, we need to change the following grammar additions:

:::{.bnf}
- initializer-list:
  - `...`~opt~ initializer-clause `...`~opt~
  - initializer-list `,` `...`~opt~ initializer-clause `...`~opt~
:::

:::{.bnf}
- template-argument-list:
  - `...`~opt~ template-argument `...`~opt~
  - template-argument-list `,` `...`~opt~ template-argument `...`~opt~
:::

:::{.bnf}
- base-specifier-list:
  - `...`~opt~ base-specifier `...`~opt~
  - base-specifier-list `,` `...`~opt~ base-specifier `...`~opt~
:::

:::{.bnf}
- mem-initializer-list:
  - `...`~opt~ mem-initializer `...`~opt~
  - mem-initializer-list `,` `...`~opt~ mem-initializer `...`~opt~
:::

:::{.bnf}
- fold-expression
  - `(` `...`~opt~ cast-expression fold-operator `...` `)`
  - `(` `...` fold-operator `...`~opt~ cast-expression `)`
  - `(` `...`~opt~ cast-expression fold-operator `...` fold-operator `...`~opt~ cast-expression `)`
:::

In the fold expression, at most one [cast-expression]{.bnf} can be nominated
as expandable.

We are still working through the semantics of this feature, but we are
reasonably confident that the syntax works, meaning that it satisfies our design
criteria in Section [](#intro). However, there are some cases where the
semantics are non-obvious and need further consideration. For example, what
happens when a pattern contains both "normal" function argument packs and
spliced packs? Are they expanded simultaneously, or is one expanded before the
other?

# Conclusions

We think the notation presented here is concise, visually distinctive, and
generally readable and writable. We have also considered the implementability
of the proposed grammar and believe that the grammar proposes no serious
or novel challenges. Furthermore, if working through use cases, we have
found it to be consistent and composable.

We therefore request that SG7 approve further work building on these specific
choices. If approved, the next step is to update P1240 with the new syntax along
with examples and use, and to start developing core wording for these features.

# References

:::{#refs}
:::

